.\"  SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0-or-later
.\"
.\"  Copyright (C) 2024, Western Digital Corporation or its affiliates.
.\"  Written by Damien Le Moal <damien.lemoal@wdc.com>
.\"
.TH ptio 8 "Oct 1 2024"
.SH NAME
ptio \- Execute SCSI and ATA passthrough commands

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ptio
[
.B \-h|\-\-help
]
.sp
.B ptio
[
.B \-\-version
]
.sp
.B ptio
[
.B options
]
.I device

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B ptio
is used to issue and execute commands on SCSI or ATA devices. \fIdevice\fP
specifies the device file path of the target device to operate on. The device
file path may point either to a block device file or to the device SG node file
of the device.  \fBptio\fR returns 0 on success and 1 in case of error.

.SH OPTIONS

.TP
\fB\-\-version\fR
Display \fBptio\R version and exit.

.TP
\fB\-h\fR, \fB\-\-help\fR
Display a short usage message and exit.

.TP
\fB\-v\fR, \fB\-\-verbose\fR
Verbose output (for debugging).

.TP
.BI \-\-info
Display device information and exit.

.TP
.BI \-\-revalidate
Force the kernel to revalidate the device (re-scan the device) and exit.

.TP
.BI \-\-scsi\-cdb " hex-string"
Specify the CDB of the SCSI command to execute as a string of space separated
hexadecimal values, with one value per byte of the CDB. The number of values
in the string must be equal to the size of the command CDB. E.g. for a 6-bytes
INQUIRY command, the CDB string must be "12 01 00 02 00 00".

.TP
.BI \-\-ata\-cdb " hex-string"
Specify the CDB of the ATA command to execute as a string of space separated
hexadecimal values, with one value per byte of the CDB. The number of values
in the string must be equal to the size of the command CDB. For a 28-bits ATA
command, the CDB must be 8 bytes long, and has the format:
"feat cnt lba[27:24] lba[23:16] lba[15:8] lba[0:7] dev cmd"
For a 48-bits ATA command, the stirng format must be:
"feat[15:8] feat[7:0] cnt[15:8] cnt[7:0] lba[47:40] lba[39:32] lba[31:24] lba[23:16] lba[15:8] lba[0:7] dev cmd".

.TP
.BI \-\-in\-buf " path"
For a command that requies input data, specify the path of the file containing
the data. The size of the file is used as the size of the buffer for the command.

.TP
.BI \-\-out\-buf " path"
For a command that generates output data, specify the path of the file to which
the data should be saved.

.TP
.BI \-\-bufsz " size"
The size in bytes of the buffer for a command that generates output data. This option
is ignored if the option \fB--in-buf\fR is used.

.TP
.BI \-\-to\-dev
Specify that the command transfers data from the host to the device.
The data to be transfered can be specified using the option \fB--in-buf\fR.

.TP
.BI \-\-to\-dev
Specify that the command transfers data from the device to the host.
The size of the transfered data must be specified using the option
\fB--bufsz\fR.

.SH AUTHOR
This version of \fBptio\fR was written by Damien Le Moal.

.SH AVAILABILITY
.B ptio
is available from https://bitbucket.wdc.com/users/damien.lemoal_wdc.com/repos/pt-tools
